



httpbis                                                       M. Thomson
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Standards Track                           M. Nottingham
Expires: December 22, 2017                                          true
                                                              W. Tarreau
                                                              Exceliance
                                                           June 20, 2017


                      Using TLS Early Data in HTTP
                    draft-thomson-http-replay-latest

Abstract

   TLS early data presents both an opportunity and a risk.  The risks of
   using TLS early data are explained as they related to HTTP.  A
   technique for reducing these risks is described, including mechanisms
   that enable the use of that technique at intermediaries.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 22, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               HTTP Early Data                   June 2017


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Retries in HTTP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  TLS Early Data in HTTP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   5.  Replay Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Reducing the Risk of Replay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   7.  Replay Avoidance for Gateways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     7.1.  The Early-Data Header Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.2.  The 422 (Too Early) Status Code . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   TLS 1.3 [TLS13] introduces the concept of early data, or zero round
   trip data.  Early data allows a client to send data to a server in
   the first round trip of a connection, without waiting for the TLS
   handshake to complete, if the client has spoken to the same server
   recently.

   For HTTP [HTTP], early data allows clients to send requests
   immediately, avoiding the one or two round trip time needed for the
   TLS handshake.  This is a significant performance enhancement,
   however early data has some significant limitations.

   The primary cost of using early data is the risk that an attacker
   might capture and replay the early data.  TLS [TLS13] describes
   techniques that reduce the likelihood that an attacker can
   successfully replay a request, but these techniques can be difficult
   to deploy and it could be impossible to guarantee perfect protection
   against replay attack.

   This document explores how HTTP treats both retries and replays of
   requests.

   To help mitigate the risk of replay, a technique for controlling the
   risks inherent to the use of early data is outlined, including a
   mechanism that grants a gateway the ability to apply this technique.
   This technique ensures that the choice to expose a request to the



Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               HTTP Early Data                   June 2017


   possibility of replay is mutual: client and server will both need to
   agree to accept the risk.

   The advice in this document also applies to use of 0-RTT in HTTP over
   QUIC [HQ].

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" are used in this
   document.  It's not shouting; when they are capitalized, they have
   the special meaning defined in [RFC2119].

3.  Retries in HTTP

   In many circumstances, HTTP requests are retried.  Applications care
   about reliability and will frequently retry requests in the event of
   errors.  This might happen automatically.  Many HTTP libraries or
   intermediaries automatically retry requests in certain conditions.

   Idempotent methods [RFC7231] are specifically defined to support
   automatic retry.  Processing a request with an idempotent method more
   than once does not result in a different end state.  HTTP/2 [HTTP2]
   also defines circumstances in which automatic retry of a request does
   not result in duplicate processing at a server, allowing retry of
   requests with non-idempotent methods.

   However, many clients will retry a request even if a retry is not
   safe.  For instance, many clients will retry POST requests if a
   connection is terminated before any octets of a response are
   received.  Even in the absence of automatic retries, when errors are
   presented to users, users might initiate a retry, by pressing a
   "reload" button or re-initiating a transaction.

   The prevalence of retries means that applications that use HTTP
   SHOULD implement measures for detecting and rejecting unwanted
   retries.  This can be seen as an application of the end-to-end
   principle of system design [E2E]: no protocol is expected to
   simultaneously provide a guarantee of at-most-once delivery and error
   tolerance.

4.  TLS Early Data in HTTP

   A server can decide whether or not to offer clients the ability to
   send early data.  This decision is made when sending a session ticket
   to clients.

   A client that wishes to use early data commences sending requests
   immediately after sending the TLS ClientHello.  If early data is



Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               HTTP Early Data                   June 2017


   accepted, early data is concatenated with other application to form a
   single stream of data.

   A server cannot choose to selectively reject early data.  TLS only
   permits a server to accept all early data, or none of it.  Once a
   server has decided to accept early data, it MUST process the messages
   that are sent by the client in early data.

   If a server rejects early data, a client MUST start sending again as
   though the connection was new.  For HTTP/2, this means re-sending the
   connection preface.  Any requests sent in early data MUST be sent
   again, unless the client decides to abandon those requuests.

   This results in a potential replay where the early data is sent to
   one server instance and the connection attempt is separately allowed
   to complete where the server instance rejects the early data.
   Replays are also possible if there are multiple server instances that
   will accept early data, or if the same server accepts early data
   (though this would be in violation of requirements in TLS).

5.  Replay Attacks

   What distinguishes a replay attack from a retry is that a retry is
   explicitly initiated by a client or user.  A client that attempts a
   retry In contrast, a replay attack is initiated by an attacker.  The
   attacker creates a copy of the messages sent by a client and replays
   these messages without the knowledge or consent of the client.

   For application data that is sent after the TLS handshake completes,
   TLS provides protection against replay.  Duplicated data is detected
   and treated as a fatal error condition (in DTLS [DTLS], duplicated
   data is instead discarded).  Similarly, transport layer loss
   recovery, such as TCP retransmission, does not generate replays
   because the transport discards duplicated data.

   TLS early data creates the potential for a replay attack that cannot
   be detected by TLS or the transport protocol.  TLS [TLS13] describes
   several mitigation strategies that reduce the ability of an attacker
   to successfully replay early data.  Servers are strongly encouraged
   to implement these techniques, but to also recognize that they are
   imperfect.

6.  Reducing the Risk of Replay

   It is immediately obvious that a client can make an explicit choice
   on each request it makes as to whether it sends that request in early
   data.  This gives a client explicit control over whether a given
   request is exposed to the risk of replay.



Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               HTTP Early Data                   June 2017


   A server can also choose whether it processes early data before the
   TLS handshake completes.  By deferring processing for a request until
   the handshake is complete, it can ensure that only a successfully
   completed connection is used for processing early requests.  Assuming
   that a replayed ClientHello will not result in additional connections
   being made by the client, this provides the server with some
   assurance that the early data was not replayed.

   If the server receives multiple requests in early data, it can make a
   determination about whether to defer processing on a per-request
   basis.

   The amount of data that a client can send in early data can be
   limited by a server using the "max_early_data_size" field that is
   sent when a server enables early data.  A server can use this to
   avoid having to commit an arbitrary amount of memory for deferred
   requests.  A server SHOULD ensure that when it accepts early data, it
   can defer processing of requests until after the TLS handshake
   completes.

   Using this technique ensures that, for any given request, both client
   and server need to agree to accept the risk of replay if that risk
   exists.

7.  Replay Avoidance for Gateways

   A generic gateway might be unable to make a determination about
   whether a given request can be processed safely when it is sent in
   early data.  In many cases, only the origin server has the necessary
   information to decide whether the risk of replay is acceptable.

   This leads to a strong incentive for gateways to be quite
   conservative, either disabling early data entirely, or only allowing
   a narrow subset of requests to be forwarded.

   To improve the ability of a gateway to accept and forward requests
   that arrive in early data, two signaling mechanisms are defined:

   o  The "Early-Data" header field is added to any request that is sent
      or received in early data.

   o  The 422 (Too Early) status code is defined for an origin server to
      indicate that a request could not be processed due to the
      consequences of a possible replay attack.

   In order for this technique to work well, the gateway needs to be
   certain that the origin server will understand the "Early-Data"




Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               HTTP Early Data                   June 2017


   header field and correctly generate the 422 status code if it does
   not wish to process the request.

7.1.  The Early-Data Header Field

   The "Early-Data" header field is defined with two values, "0" and
   "1".  Here it is shown using the ABNF [ABNF]:

   Early-Data = "0" / "1"

   For example:

   POST /resource HTTP/1.0
   Host: example.com
   Early-Data: 1
   Content-Length: 14

   message body

   A client SHOULD include the "Early-Data" header field with a value of
   "1" if it sends a request in TLS early data.  This indicates to the
   intermediary or server that it understands the 422 (Too Early) status
   code and will retry the request.

   The "Early-Data" header field is omitted from a request or set to "0"
   when the request arrives after the TLS handshake completes.  An
   intermediary MUST NOT add this header field with a value of "0" or
   remove a header field if it has a value of "1".

   A "Early-Data" header field with a value of "1" is added to a request
   when forwarding a request from a connection that has an incomplete
   TLS handshake.  In other words, a value of "1" identifies requests
   that were sent in TLS early data.  A value of "1" indicates that the
   request might have been replayed.

   An intermediary that receives a request in TLS early data can forward
   the request with the "Early-Data" header field add and set to "1".
   If the server responds with a 422 (Too Early) status code, the
   intermediary can then wait until the TLS handshake completes and
   forward the request again.

7.2.  The 422 (Too Early) Status Code

   A 422 (Too Early) status code indicates that the server that is
   unwilling to risk processing requests that might be replayed.

   The primary use of this header field is to cause clients or
   intermediaries to retry a request.  A client or intermediary MAY



Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               HTTP Early Data                   June 2017


   retry any request automatically if they receive a 422 (Too Early)
   status code.  A request that receives a 422 (Too Early) status code
   MUST NOT be retried in TLS early data.

   An intermediary that forwards a request SHOULD wait until the TLS
   handshake on the connection that carries the original request is
   complete before retrying.  If the original request that arrived at
   the intermediary contained an "Early-Data" header field with a value
   of "1", the intermediary MAY instead forward the 422 (Too Early)
   status code.

   A server SHOULD NOT generate the 422 (Too Early) status code unless
   the request includes an "Early-Data" header field with a value of
   "1".

8.  Security Considerations

   Using early data exposes a client to the risk that their request is
   replayed.  A retried or replayed request can produce different side
   effects on the server.  That might be used for traffic analysis to
   recover information about requests or the resources those requests
   target.

   A gateway that forwards requests that were received in early data
   MUST only do so if it knows that the server that receives those
   requests understands the "Early-Data" header field and will correctly
   generate a 422 (Too Early) status code.  A gateway that isn't certain
   about server support SHOULD either delay forwarding the request until
   the TLS handshake completes, or send a 422 (Too Early) status code in
   response.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers the "Early-Data" header field in the "Message
   Headers" registry [HEADERS].

   Header field name:  Early-Data

   Applicable protocol:  http

   Status:  standard

   Author/Change controller:  IETF

   Specification document(s):  This document

   Related information:  (empty)




Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               HTTP Early Data                   June 2017


   This document registers the 422 (Too Early) status code in the
   "Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Status Code" registry established
   in [RFC7231].

   Value:  422

   Description:  Too Early

   Reference:  This document

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [ABNF]     Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5234, January 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5234>.

   [HEADERS]  Klyne, G., Nottingham, M., and J. Mogul, "Registration
              Procedures for Message Header Fields", BCP 90, RFC 3864,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3864, September 2004,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3864>.

   [HTTP]     Fielding, R., Ed. and J. Reschke, Ed., "Hypertext Transfer
              Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and Routing",
              RFC 7230, DOI 10.17487/RFC7230, June 2014,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7230>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7231]  Fielding, R., Ed. and J. Reschke, Ed., "Hypertext Transfer
              Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Semantics and Content", RFC 7231,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7231, June 2014,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7231>.

   [TLS13]    Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", draft-ietf-tls-tls13-20 (work in progress),
              April 2017.

10.2.  Informative References

   [DTLS]     Rescorla, E. and N. Modadugu, "Datagram Transport Layer
              Security Version 1.2", RFC 6347, DOI 10.17487/RFC6347,
              January 2012, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6347>.



Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               HTTP Early Data                   June 2017


   [E2E]      Saltzer, J., Reed, D., and D. Clark, "End-to-end arguments
              in system design", ACM Transactions on Computer
              Systems Vol. 2, pp. 277-288, DOI 10.1145/357401.357402,
              November 1984.

   [HQ]       Bishop, M., "Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) over
              QUIC", draft-ietf-quic-http-04 (work in progress), June
              2017.

   [HTTP2]    Belshe, M., Peon, R., and M. Thomson, Ed., "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol Version 2 (HTTP/2)", RFC 7540,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7540, May 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7540>.

Authors' Addresses

   Martin Thomson
   Mozilla

   Email: martin.thomson@gmail.com


   Mark Nottingham
   true

   Email: mnot@mnot.net


   Willy Tarreau
   Exceliance

   Email: w@1wt.eu



















Thomson, et al.         Expires December 22, 2017               [Page 9]
